DEP: Design proposal for OnDelete Strategy (#879)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/proposals/07-sts-ondelete-strategy.md

## Terminology

- **OnDelete**: A StatefulSet update strategy where pods are only updated when they are explicitly deleted. The StatefulSet controller does not automatically roll pods on template changes.
- **RollingUpdate**: A StatefulSet update strategy where the StatefulSet controller automatically updates pods one by one, from the highest ordinal to the lowest.
- **Quorum**: The minimum number of etcd members that must agree on a value for the cluster to make progress. For a 3-member cluster, quorum is 2.
- **Leader**: The etcd member responsible for handling client write requests and coordinating replication.
- **Follower**: An etcd member that replicates data from the leader and can serve linearizable reads.
- **Participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is part of the quorum (the member is either a leader or a follower).

> - **Non-participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is not part of the quorum (the member may be down, restarting, or not yet joined).

Reviewer: I'm not very much convinced with these 2 terminologies and their definitions. I understand what you're trying to say by defining "Participating and non-Participating pods" but IMO it's hard to define such state and to take decision on that basis as member pods can be temporary down as well as permanently down.
Now, Let's take case by case:
1. If member is temporary down (pod restart) then it will come up ... nothing to done from our side 🤷‍♂️ .
2. If member is permanently down then there will be 2 cases again:
    - If there is only 1 member down then single restoration will/should trigger, and it should come up as healthy.
    - If there is 1+ member are unhealthy then it's permanent quorum loss there nobody can't do anything, it require manual intervention.

Author: I agree with the cases you mentioned, but from the perspective of ondelete controller whose job is to update the pods in a reasonable manner - need not get into the complexities of why a member is down, that opens up a lot of complexity. I feel it's much simpler and correct to let the ondelete do it's work based on the state it observes and if it fixes the problem, all good. But if not due to permanent quorum loss, that anyway requires manual intervention as you mentioned - this was the case previously as well. So The `participating` and `non-participating` distinction helps simplify the proposal by defining a clear process on which one gets deleted when. If you feel the name itself is a bit confusing, I'm open to change that if you have a better recommendation.

Reviewer: my point was, this state: "non-participating" is very transient state (~99% times apart from  ~1-2% volume attach-deattach issue), should on-delete controller make a decision on basis of state which is very transient in nature or it can simply waits for this "non-participating" to become "participating" then start its algorithm of picking it, isn't that will simplify lot of things ?

Author: I get your concern but imo the purpose of the ondelete controller should always be to progress the updates in the best way "possible", we can make many tiny improvements but then we would be diverging from our original problem statement. 

If at the time of the rolling, a pod is not actively participating in the quorum for any reason is treated the same as I believe ondelete controller shouldn't bother too much about what kind of issue it is, that is for us/operators to decide if the update process is stuck due to permanent quorum loss or anything. Wdyt?

Reviewer: ok, if you feel that's necessary then its fine. Now I just wanted to know one more thing, Will there be any threshold time to declare a member is in "non-participating" state or controller just check the readiness of member once and declare that member a "non-participating" ?

Author: I'm thinking to not introduce any threshold time for 2 reasons:
1. the pod update process is meant to be a very short process and every pod has to go through the update, so adding extra wait time and then anyway eventually deleting them will not much difference - now let's say the ondelete controller picks a pod for reconciling in this reconcile loop, then it means all other pods which were more damaged already was updated, and it came to this only after them - now if let say we wait for some threshold time to see if this pod becomes healthy, it will still become a follower and we'll pick that up again to update -- so anyway in both cases that pod becomes our target for updation, so I would rather proceed than introducing some wait.
2. we don't precisely know how much time to wait for, we will have to choose a magic number and even then we can pick to update a pod that's only in transient quorum loss.

Wdyt?

Reviewer: ok, fine

> - **Non-participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is not part of the quorum (the member may be down, restarting, or not yet joined).

Reviewer 2: Still a bit unclear about this. A member may be restarting, but would still be part of the quorum right? Wouldn't that make it a participating pod? A member that's not yet joined (or is a learner) is clearly a non-participating pod, but it seems like a member that's down (unhealthy) would also still be part of the quorum - just that if one member is down in a 3-member cluster, then only 2 members are healthy, and if 2 are down, then the cluster has lost quorum.

Please clarify this.

Author: > A member may be restarting, but would still be part of the quorum right?

While the cluster can still have quorum, but this restarting member is not contributing to that quorum, correct? A member can not be part of quorum because of two reasons 1) it's readiness probe call is unanswered due to etcd container having internal problems leading to crashes, etc 2) it's readiness probe call is answered and is failing, in this case it's because the cluster lost quorum, so we cannot say that this pod is contributing to quorum when quorum itself is not a reality in that moment.

So effectively by `non-participating` here, I mean that the corresponding etcd container's contribution to the quorum is nil, not about whether the cluster is quorate or not.

Pls lmk if it's still unclear, we can have an internal discussion :)

Reviewer 2: Ok, so to understand correctly, a participating pod means it's actively part of the current quorum right? Ex: 3-member cluster with a learner still learning before joining, and one of the followers is currently restarting:
- leader is `participating`
- one follower is `participating`
- one follower (the one that's restarting) is `non-participating`
- learner is `non-participating`

Is my understanding correct?

Author: are you referring to a 4-member etcd cluster ( 3 prev + 1 new learner)? In that case quorum would be 3, and since two etcd containers are not contributing to the quorum, the entire quorum is now lost... so no one is now participating in the quorum ( because it doesn't exist ).

But in the same case if the followers were not restarting - then we have 3 for quorum, so it looks like below:

- leader is `participating`
- two followers are `participating`
- learner is `non-participating`

Or did I not understand your question properly?

Reviewer 2: Assume the case of live CPM where 3-member cluster is scaled to 5 members (3 -> 4 -> 5). So during the time when etcd.spec.replicas=4, the cluster has 3 voting members and one learner yet to join. That's the case I'm talking about, where the cluster has 1 leader, 2 followers, and one learner. Until the learner joins, the number of voting members in the cluster would be 3, and hence the quorum requirement would be 2.

Author: In this case what you said in this comment https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3198947302 is right. 

More specifically this :
> a participating pod means it's actively part of the current quorum right?

The member has to be healthy first for it to be an active participant in the quorum, so a restarting member is consiered `non-participating`.

Reviewer 2: Understood, thanks

Consider a 3-member etcd cluster with pods `P-0`, `P-1`, and `P-2`. If `P-0` becomes unhealthy (due to network issues, node failure, or an internal error), the cluster still has quorum with `P-1` and `P-2`. Now, if a StatefulSet template update is triggered (for example, an image version bump), the StatefulSet controller starts rolling from `P-2`. It deletes `P-2` and waits for it to come back. During this window, only `P-1` is healthy and participating, which is below quorum (2 out of 3). The cluster experiences a quorum loss that could have been entirely avoided if the update had started with the already-unhealthy `P-0` instead.

The following diagram illustrates how the `RollingUpdate` strategy can lead to quorum loss in this scenario:

<div align="center">
<img src="assets/06-rolling-update-state-diagram.png" alt="RollingUpdate state diagram showing quorum loss when an unhealthy pod exists" width="500">
</div>

The StatefulSet controller starts from Pod N (the highest ordinal), terminates it, and waits for the new pod to become ready. If the terminated pod is not the originally unhealthy one, quorum is lost with 2 members down.

> For a single-node etcd cluster, both `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` produce the same outcome since there is only one pod to update. The benefit of `OnDelete` is specific to multi-node clusters where update ordering matters.

Reviewer: should we keep using `RollingUpdate` for singleton cluster as there is no effect of moving to `OnDelete` then why to make it complicated ?
On scale-up just the update the updateStrategy to `OnDelete`, wdyt ?
/cc @shreyas-s-rao

Reviewer 2: For single-node it doesn't make much of a difference. But we can avoid the switching between update strategies when scale-up happens. And of course, if the Etcd spec says "replicas:1, updateStrategy: OnDelete`, then druid must respect that and set it in the sts spec accordingly.

Author: > if the Etcd spec says "replicas:1, updateStrategy: OnDelete`, then druid must respect that and set it in the sts spec accordingly.

I agree with this, while what Ishan mentioned is correct that there's no effect but I feel we should respect the user decision on what they want, not obeying it actually makes it more complicated imo.

Reviewer 3: While i agree that we should just use `OnDelete` strategy and not bother switching to `RollingUpdate` for non-HA etcd-clusters, anvesh's response is not correct.

>while what Ishan mentioned is correct that there's no effect but I feel we should respect the user decision on what they want, not obeying it actually makes it more complicated imo.

Which user decision do you hint at? The user has no choice in the matter today w.r.t which update strategy is chosen by etcd-druid internally to manage an etcd cluster. So i am bit confused.

Author: I meant that about the API spec field we've proposed to introduce in this DEP where user can specify whether they want to go with quorum preserving way of `OnDelete` or the regular update flow as done by the STS controller with `RollingUpdate`. 

This comment and a few others are actually related to that one decision as to whether we need to allow configuring the updateStrategy or not. I guess we need a discussion on that. Wdyt?

   The controller determines local process liveness by inspecting the pod's container status from the Kubernetes API. If the etcd container is in `CrashLoopBackOff`, `Error`, or is not running, the process is considered dead. If the container is `Running` but the readiness probe is failing, the process is alive but quorum is lost.

   In the future, adding a liveness probe to the etcd container using etcd's native `/livez` endpoint (available since etcd 3.5.x, performs a serializable/local-only health check) would provide a more reliable signal. This is tracked in [etcd-wrapper#7](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-wrapper/issues/7) and [etcd-druid#280](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/280). The OnDelete controller is designed to work without this probe (using container status as described above) and to benefit from it when available.

### Pod Update Procedure

> The controller processes one pod per reconciliation cycle. After updating a pod, it requeues and waits for the pod to come back before proceeding to the next one. This ensures that the cluster is never in a state where more than one pod is being updated at the same time due to the controller's own actions.

Reviewer 2: This also ensures that the reconciler is not waiting on a pod to get recreated, so we don't block a reconciler thread for each cluster update. Can you add this as a benefit too?

Author: True, but can we consider that a benefit though? Isn't it considered a standard practice in controller design to requeue instead of blocking threads? If you feel it strongly, I can add that.

Reviewer 2: Since you were mentioning the benefits, I thought this could be added as well, just to be explicit.

Author: Sure, we can add that. Will resolve this comment once I add it together with other changes requested by other reviewers once they respond.

Author: I just realised that it's already covered at https://github.com/anveshreddy18/etcd-druid/blob/d2ca76bdd9b608bf3ec0725594983bd8e94deed8/docs/proposals/06-sts-ondelete-strategy.md?plain=1#L86. So I guess we don't need it again here.

Reviewer 3: @shreyas-s-rao how are you blocking a reconciler thread? A quick requeue is not a block - it is the opposite of blocking. Can you please explain?

> The controller processes one pod per reconciliation cycle. After updating a pod, it requeues and waits for the pod to come back before proceeding to the next one. This ensures that the cluster is never in a state where more than one pod is being updated at the same time due to the controller's own actions.

Reviewer 4: What happens if a pod never comes back (Resource exhaustion, PV stuck in Pending, scheduling constraints? Should the proposal define: (1) a timeout after which the controller gives up or escalates, (2) whether exponential backoff is applied to requeue intervals, and (3) how the stuck state is surfaced, e.g., condition, event, metric (weekest). Without this, a single stuck pod blocks all further updates indefinitely, right?

Author: > Without this, a single stuck pod blocks all further updates indefinitely, right?

Yes, I did think about this and left it to be retried indefinitely, but you raise a valid suggestion - `a timeout after which the controller gives up or escalates` -- I think escalating is appropriate here, we can have it as a condition on the Etcd and dashboard can surface the error if and when an update is stuck for a long time ( as defined by a timeout ), then a manual intervention from etcd team might be the best course of action.

What do you think @shreyas-s-rao @ishan16696

Reviewer 2: The same issue is applicable for regular rolling update by statefulset controller too today - if a pod gets stuck and doesn't come up, the rolling will not continue. But since the pod update when using `OnDelete` strategy is in druid's control, druid can emit metrics and we can configure alerts for such cases. I would not expect druid itself to perform any remediations in such cases since the pod can get stuck for multiple reasons and druid cannot be ready to handle every such case.

Reviewer: I agree with shreyas here but I wouldn't like to configure a alert for such cases because if one of etcd pod becomes `not ready` then etcd resource status is already capturing that and it will get reflected in gardener dashboard. From on-delete controller perspective a exponential retry is seems to be a good option to me.

Author: I agree with both of you, I think we just need to do a exponential retry when we're waiting for a pod to become ready after the update as @ishan16696 mentioned, that'd be the most appropriate concern for the ondelete controller imo.

Reviewer 3: It depends - if you have a 5 member cluster and lets say that all members are healthy in the beginning. Then you have a room of 2 to play with without causing loss of quorum. This means if the first pod that you pick to update now gets blocked - should you stop and not proceed further or should you check - `do i have sufficient room to try another Pod without causing quorum to be destroyed` and based on that you either stop or proceed.

I have not thought through this myself but this is a question that i have at the moment. Should we play extremely conservative and stop at the first failure or go to the extent where the quorum is still maintained?

Author: Yes, I've also mentioned this in the proposal that with >3 member cluster we have more room to update multiple pods at once and get the update done faster but imo we would still want to be conservative because the permutations and combinations of updates & the kind of issues it'll bring will be a lot and it'll be hard for ondelete controller to dynamically decide what to do next when let say one out of them gets updated but not the other ( gets stuck for some reason ), etc ... The proposal covers all clusters >3 also but makes sure we're not accidentally causing quorum while trying to make the update.

The OnDelete controller will address this by computing the equivalent information from the pods directly (comparing each pod's `controller-revision-hash` with the StatefulSet's `updateRevision`). The existing readiness and condition checks will be updated to use this pod-level comparison when the `OnDelete` strategy is active.

### Transitioning Between Strategies

Transitioning between `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` is seamless and requires no manual intervention beyond changing the `spec.updateStrategy` field on the Etcd custom resource.

> **Switching from RollingUpdate to OnDelete:**

Reviewer 2: Same question as above. If there's an ongoing rolling update (that's stuck for some reason) and the strategy is changed to OnDelete, how would OnDelete controller handle it? I would assume this should work fine since it checks the pod controller-revision-hash to know which ones were already updated, and only considers the remaining un-updated ones for ondelete-style update, correct?

Author: Yes exactly as you assumed, switching between strategies is seamless as both the controllers  ( ondelete & even sts controller too ) check controller revision hash and update revision to decide, so that's not a concern for us.

Author: Yeah you're right - take an edge case - if the rolling update was stuck because it was waiting for an `updated pod` to come up, then when ondelete takes over it also waits on the same pod to come up, that behaviour remains intact, the main place where ondelete & rollingupdate differ is in the order of selection.

1. The operator sets `spec.updateStrategy: OnDelete` on the Etcd CR.
2. On the next Etcd reconciliation, the StatefulSet component updates the StatefulSet's `spec.updateStrategy` to `OnDelete`.
3. The OnDelete controller's predicate now matches this StatefulSet. If there are any outdated pods (from a previously in-progress RollingUpdate or from a new template change), the OnDelete controller picks up the work and starts updating pods in its health-aware order.
4. If no pods are outdated, the OnDelete controller simply watches for future StatefulSet template changes.

> **Switching from OnDelete to RollingUpdate:**

Reviewer 2: I wonder what would happen if there's an update currently in progress when this change is made. So OnDelete controller has just updated pod-1, when the `updateStrategy` is changed to `RollingUpdate`. Would sts controller now correctly update the remaining two pods (or maybe all the 3 pods)? Has this behaviour been tested?

Author: In this case the rolling update strategy as performed by sts controller will update only the remainig 2 pods, I've tested this behaviour in poc and it works as expected because sts controller also checks the same `controller-revision-hash` and sts updateRevision to decide which all pods need to be updated, so they're consistent in that.

- **RollingUpdate**: A StatefulSet update strategy where the StatefulSet controller automatically updates pods one by one, from the highest ordinal to the lowest.
- **Quorum**: The minimum number of etcd members that must agree on a value for the cluster to make progress. For a 3-member cluster, quorum is 2.
- **Leader**: The etcd member responsible for handling client write requests and coordinating replication.
- **Follower**: An etcd member that replicates data from the leader and can serve linearizable reads.
- **Participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is part of the quorum (the member is either a leader or a follower).
- **Non-participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is not part of the quorum (the member may be down, restarting, or not yet joined).

## Motivation

etcd-druid deploys etcd clusters as StatefulSets with `RollingUpdate` strategy. The StatefulSet controller rolls pods from the highest ordinal to the lowest, without considering the health or role of individual etcd members. This creates a risk of unintended quorum loss.

> Consider a 3-member etcd cluster with pods `P-0`, `P-1`, and `P-2`. If `P-0` becomes unhealthy (due to network issues, node failure, or an internal error), the cluster still has quorum with `P-1` and `P-2`. Now, if a StatefulSet template update is triggered (for example, an image version bump), the StatefulSet controller starts rolling from `P-2`. It deletes `P-2` and waits for it to come back. During this window, only `P-1` is healthy and participating, which is below quorum (2 out of 3). The cluster experiences a transient quorum loss that could have been entirely avoided if the update had started with the already-unhealthy `P-0` instead.

Reviewer 5: I'm not really sure whether this should be the primary motivation though. I think this is a rare case which could partially be solved with OnDelete strategy. I wonder if a more general improvement due to OnDelete strategy like "optimizing the number of leader moves during an update" could be quoted as the primary motivation instead.

Explanation for why I think this is a rare case and why I think it is only partially solved by OnDelete:
1. Operationally we haven't observed this case of the StatefulSet update coinciding with a cluster state where a pod was already unhealthy. This could mean either of these things:
    * The coincidence has never occurred in the past.
    * The coincidence has occurred, but it was brief and transient enough to not set off any alarms for us to notice.
2. We assume that a restart of the unhealthy pod would resolve the issue with the pod. In which case, I'm not sure there are many classes of issues where a container restart (which Kubernetes already does) could not resolve, but a pod restart could resolve without manual intervention. It would be ideal if some practical example could be mentioned for this case to motivate the point.
3. The mentioned causes of the unhealthy pod like node failure could also cause transient quorum loss during an update with OnDelete strategy (Cases like the OnDelete controller triggers a pod deletion and before the pod becomes ready the node behind another pod fails). So, we're only solving a specific subset of cases.

Author: Sorry I didn't get, the primary motivation was always about minimising transient quorum loss as opposed to optimising no.of leader moves as leader moves are anyway graceful as mentioned [here](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/326d5a2e7765d1d918865d2c3897f0a27320db80/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1319-L1331). While I agree that the case I mentioned could be rare ( as we don't have the data to prove otherwise ) but the impact of that when it happens is what makes that case meaningful, and it's not like that's a theoretical problem as it can always happen anytime so I feel it's better to cover that as the motivation than quoting a marginal improvement with minimising no.of leader updates.

For 1.b):
I don't think that would've been the case always, we typically don't operate on the front line and miss a good no.of instances where a temporary quorum loss would've happened, out of them sometimes we'll get an RCA request but by the time we respond we could lose some data or the cluster owner would've moved ahead after creating the ticket, etc thereby the ticket becomes inconclusive - so the point is that even if it's a transient case ( we're mainly targetting transient issues though ) how much damage it can cause is the question and if we can prevent a good no.of them by updating the pod in question or by blocking the update process altogether, then I'd consider it a win over what we have.

for 2):
> We assume that a restart of the unhealthy pod would resolve the issue with the pod

Not necessarily, as I mentioned in the above point the main advantage of this is that we block the automated update process to investigate into why the unhealthy pod couldn't resolve after a restart and do manual operations on it rather than letting it go through and causing quorum loss ( in the case of rollingupdate ).

for 3):

Agreed. It's covered in the non-goals section that we don't have control over such infra issues, ondelete controller can only decide what to do based on the current state of the cluster and can't anticipate future issues like with node, etc; so imo it's actually right that it should proceed with the updates in this case and whatever happens after that's done is checked in the next reconciliation loop and it'll try to not damage the cluster state further. 

Wdyt?

Reviewer 5: > if we can prevent a good no.of them by updating the pod in question or by blocking the update process altogether, then I'd consider it a win over what we have.

Okay, agreed.

>> We assume that a restart of the unhealthy pod would resolve the issue with the pod

> I mentioned in the above point the main advantage of this is that we block the automated update process to investigate into why the unhealthy pod couldn't resolve after a restart and do manual operations on it

I'm not sure I understand this. In the section for Alternatives, when talking about `maxUnavailable`, it is stated that 

"This approach has a key limitation: the StatefulSet controller waits for any unavailable pod to recover before proceeding. If a pod is already unhealthy and the update itself might fix it (for example, a configuration change or image bump), the controller is stuck waiting. The `OnDelete` strategy does not have this limitation because it can proactively delete the unhealthy pod first, potentially resolving the issue."

So, as I understand it the decision to use OnDelete instead of a simpler strategy like RollingUpdate + `maxUnavailable` hinges on the fact that we assume OnDelete strategy could potentially resolve the issue via a restart whereas the `maxAvailable` strategy would never be able to do so.

Essentially the premise behind the quoted statement from the Alternatives section is that there is a class of issues that a container restart (which Kubernetes already does) could not resolve, but a pod restart could resolve without manual intervention and that OnDelete would be able to help with this class of issues. My concern was about whether there are any issues you're aware of that fall into this class. Sorry, I didn't give enough context in the original comment. Feel free to correct me if my understanding is incorrect :)

Author: As discussed offline: While your reasoning is correct, k8s restarts of the containers happen if there's a liveness probe which is failing, then kubelet restarts but the etcd container as of now doesn't have it, so we could potentially solve issues by restarting the pod, so in that the original statement is still valid.

- Ensure that updates triggered by changes to the StatefulSet pod template (image versions, configuration, resource requests) are propagated to pods under druid's control.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not claim to prevent all forms of quorum loss. It reduces the likelihood of quorum loss caused by poorly-ordered voluntary pod updates.
- This proposal does not cover PVC resizing or volume replacement. The OnDelete strategy makes PVC resizing safer (see [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing)), but the PVC resize flow itself is a separate feature.
- Optimizing the update process for clusters with more than 3 replicas (updating multiple pods concurrently while maintaining quorum) is left as future work.

## Proposal

### Update Strategy as an Etcd Spec Field

The update strategy will be exposed as a field on the Etcd custom resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Etcd
spec:
  updateStrategy: RollingUpdate  # or OnDelete
```

- **Default value**: `RollingUpdate`
- **Valid values**: `OnDelete`, `RollingUpdate`

> The default is set to `RollingUpdate` to preserve the existing behaviour for current clusters; `OnDelete` is opt-in initially so it can be exercised on selected clusters. Once `OnDelete` has been validated for few releases, the default will switch to `OnDelete` in a subsequent release. Both strategies remain valid indefinitely.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I understand this fully. Since the default for the field will be `RollingUpdate` for a few releases, the `etcd-druid` instances that are running will pick this up and persist this default in the `Etcd` objects they're managing. In a future release, even if the default changes, those `Etcd` objects that were persisted earlier would still be applicable unless the user explicitly sets the field to `OnDelete`. I wonder if this is the expected behaviour.

Author: So we introduce a new `spec.updateStrategy` field (optional) for this - and the old `Etcd` objects that were persisted earlier will not have this field unless someone explicitly sets it to some strategy -> then etcd controller propagates that. But if they don't set any field, then the new druid release will default that to `OnDelete` thereby behaving as expected. Pls lmk if you have any questions.

Reviewer 5: Could you clarify on the API?

I see it as a `string` field in the proposal. So, I'm assuming you have defaults set using kubebuilder markers, so it would be added to the defaulting logic that executed during creation/updation of the CR.

Given the assumption, then consider this sequence of events (assume default is `RollingUpdate` initially):
1. User created CR omitting the `updateStrategy` field.
    * Now the defaulting logic sets `updateStrategy` as `RollingUpdate` and persists the `Etcd` object in storage.
2. We update druid with the new default value as `OnDelete`.
3. The user doesn't change the `updateStrategy` field (is omitted now as well) and triggers reconciliation.

In the above sequence, does the default in the old `Etcd` object created by the user change to `OnDelete`?(From what I understand, this is the expectation). I think it wouldn't change to `OnDelete` unless the user explicitly sets`updateStrategy` to `OnDelete`. Based on my understanding, if we wish for it to change to `OnDelete` after our change in defaults, the field should be a pointer and we should be setting the default during reconciliation during pointer de-referencing (the default parameter in `ptr.Deref`). Please feel free to correct me if I'm wrong.

Author: As discussed offline: We'll be having this field as a pointer so that not setting any value means druid can set the updatestrategy to whatever is the default in that specific druid version. I'll add the snippet for go type as well in this to clear the confusion.

Author: done, pls check :)

Reviewer 5: Looks good, thanks.

**Controller predicate:** The controller only reconciles StatefulSets whose `spec.updateStrategy.type` is set to `OnDelete`. This means the controller is always registered in the controller manager but has zero overhead for clusters using `RollingUpdate`.

### Determining Whether a Pod Needs Updating

A pod is considered outdated if its `controller-revision-hash` label does not match the StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision`. The `controller-revision-hash` is a Kubernetes-managed label on each pod that reflects the revision of the pod template it was created from.

> **Note:** The `controller-revision-hash` is an internal contract of the Kubernetes StatefulSet controller rather than a documented public API. Changes to its semantics are unlikely but possible; if Kubernetes alters how this label is populated, the comparison performed here would need to be revisited.
>
> The `controller-revision-hash` is computed from the pod template spec only. Changes to `volumeClaimTemplates` do not affect this hash. See [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing).

### Health Assessment

The OnDelete controller needs to understand two things about each pod:

> 1. **Is the pod participating in the etcd quorum?** This is determined by the etcd container's readiness. The readiness probe hits etcd-wrapper's `/readyz` endpoint, which performs an etcd client `Get` call. This is a linearizable (cluster-wide) check: it succeeds only when the etcd member can serve traffic, which requires quorum. When quorum is lost, all pods fail readiness, even those whose local etcd process is running fine.

Reviewer 5: Just a thought: would we be allowing updates during phases like a scale-up? For instance if we're scaling from 1 to 3. During the scale up when the etcd member is a learner, I wonder what the `/readyz` response would be, since a learner should be able to service a linearizable `Get` request. So, it might not be right to assume that it is participating in quorum in that case. Feel free to correct me if I'm wrong.

Reviewer 5: > Learner rejects client reads and writes (client balancer should not route requests to learner)
https://etcd.io/docs/v3.6/learning/design-learner/

It seems like learner wouldn't be able to serve reads. Sorry for the confusion.

2. **Is the local etcd process alive?** This is a separate question from quorum participation. A pod may fail readiness (because quorum is lost) while its local etcd process is perfectly healthy. Distinguishing between "process is dead" and "process is alive but quorum is lost" allows the controller to make better decisions about which non-participating pod to update first.

>    The controller determines local process liveness by inspecting the pod's container status from the Kubernetes API. If the etcd container is in `CrashLoopBackOff`, `Error`, or is not running, the process is considered dead. If the container is `Running` but the readiness probe is failing, the process is alive but quorum is lost.

Reviewer 5: I think `CrashLoopBackOff`/`Error` are pod-level statuses and not container-level ones from what I understand from https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#container-states. Unless you're referring to other mechanisms of determining the container status.

Author: I've pushed the changes Rinish.
The `CrashLoopBackOff`, etc are statuses on the container-level itself, but they're not a an API exposed state but they're represented as a `reason` under the `pod.status.containerStatuses[].state.waiting/terminating` state. 

Check these examples:
<img width="584" height="219" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2daaedf9-567d-44a6-ab7f-ccb971150e5a" />
<img width="584" height="219" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c8a9d5b-1abd-4af2-9121-d33627d2e256" />
<img width="584" height="219" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09ecfc61-f6a9-45d1-82a2-adef9899cc0e" />

So we will look for the container state and the reason to diferentiate between etcd container's being ready:false with quorum loss vs ready:false with container/process issues. I hope that answers your question : pls check the updated proposal.

Reviewer 5: Looks good, thanks for the explanation!

   In the future, adding a liveness probe to the etcd container using etcd's native `/livez` endpoint (available since etcd 3.5.x, performs a serializable/local-only health check) would provide a more reliable signal. This is tracked in [etcd-wrapper#7](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-wrapper/issues/7) and [etcd-druid#280](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/280). The OnDelete controller is designed to work without this probe (using container status as described above) and to benefit from it when available.

### Pod Update Procedure

The controller processes one pod per reconciliation cycle. After updating a pod, it requeues and waits for the pod to come back before proceeding to the next one. This ensures that the cluster is never in a state where more than one pod is being updated at the same time due to the controller's own actions.

The procedure in each reconciliation cycle:

**Step 1: Check if all pods are up to date.** Compare each pod's `controller-revision-hash` with the StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision`. If all match, the update is complete.

> **Step 2: Check for non-participating pods that need updating.** If any outdated pod is non-participating, select one for deletion using the following sub-priority:

Reviewer 5: As mentioned by @ishan16696 in https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3231484677, if we don't have a time threshold for classifying a pod as non-participating (or have some other mechanism), could there be cases where we end up misclassifying the pod? For example, let's say the OnDemand controller picked a pod for deletion and issued a delete call to an etcd pod. In the next reconciliation, if the pod wasn't deleted and recreated by that time, it might be classified as non-participating pod that needs updating, which I'm not sure is intended.

Author: I addressed @ishan16696 's comment here: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3232276884.

> let's say the OnDemand controller picked a pod for deletion and issued a delete call to an etcd pod. In the next reconciliation, if the pod wasn't deleted and recreated by that time, it might be classified as non-participating pod that needs updating, which I'm not sure is intended.

Didn't understand what exactly is the issue, can you expand on this case a bit more? If I'm not wrong, I think the misunderstanding is that we do classification once for all the pods and stick with it across the reconciliations, but that's not how it's done as the classification is local to that particular reconciliation. Or is it something else? can you pls describe the issue in more detail.

Reviewer 5: No, I understand that we don't stick to the classification across reconciliation. My concern is about the fresh classification we do at the start of the reconciliation. Consider this sequence:

Initially there are etcd-0 (F), etcd-1 (F), etcd-2 (L) pods all of which are healthy. Update is triggered.

First reconciliation:
1. OnDelete controller determines all pods are `participating` and `etcd-2` is the leader.
2. Picks `etcd-0` for the update and issues delete call.

Second reconciliation:
1. `etcd-0` hasn't terminated yet. The pod is in `Terminating` and the etcd container is in `Terminated` state. So essentially the pod hasn't been deleted yet.
2. OnDelete determines that `etcd-0` is `non-participating pod that needs updating` according to step-2 (at least that is my understanding, feel free to correct me if I'm wrong).

My concern is whether this classification is correct?

Reviewer 5: (from offline discussion): It is expected. Though, to avoid the multiple delete calls being sent to pods like this there could be a small check for deletionTimestamp as part of the logic.

Author: Can we resolve this as it's an implementation detail and I'll make sure to include this in the code changes?

Reviewer 5: Sure, no issues. I'll mark this as resolved, thanks!

Reviewer 3: What has been highlighted by @CaptainIRS is valid - you need to record the decision that you took in the previous reconciliation. If a Pod is selected for update and in the next reconciliation you must have a deterministic way to check if there is a `InFlightPod` that has been selected for update in the previous cycle. This should survive the crash of the etcd-druid operator, therefore it should be preserved/captured as part of `Etcd.Status`.

Can you detail out the offline discussions that have happened which marks this as a mere implementation detail?

Reviewer 5: My understanding from the offline discussion is that by doing a fresh classification of the pods at the start of every reconciliation, we could get away without persisting the information about which specific pod we picked for update in the past reconciliations (also holds true across restarts of the etcd-druid itself). The worst thing that could happen is that a pod that is being updated is classified as `non-participating pod that needs updating`, which would result in excessive delete calls issued to the particular pod, but this could be fixed by just checking for the presence of `deletionTimestamp` before issuing a delete call (implementation detail). Maybe @anveshreddy18 can correct me if I'm missing something. Please do let us know if there could be cases where the fresh classification at the start of reconciliation could lead to the wrong pod being picked for update.

Author: You're right @CaptainIRS , I've also mentioned the same in the call with Madhav and we agreed that we don't need to persist any information in the status as everything is designed to be dynamic by getting all required information from the pods themselves.

Since VPA does not modify the StatefulSet pod template, it does not trigger a new `updateRevision` and the OnDelete controller is not involved in VPA-driven resource updates. VPA continues to operate independently regardless of the update strategy.

### Interaction with PVC Resizing

The PVC resizing story ([etcd-druid#481](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/481)) benefits from `OnDelete` because it allows controlled per-pod volume replacement while maintaining quorum. However, the OnDelete controller and PVC resizing are independent features, and the PVC resize flow will be covered in a separate proposal.

The OnDelete controller detects outdated pods by comparing `controller-revision-hash` labels. This hash is computed from the pod template spec only and does not include `volumeClaimTemplates`. This means that a change to `storageCapacity` or `storageClass` alone (without any pod template change) will not be detected by the OnDelete controller. The PVC resize flow must handle pod deletion independently in such cases.

### Metrics

The OnDelete controller exposes the following metrics:

> - `etcddruid_ondelete_update_duration_seconds`: Time from the first detection of an `updateRevision` change to the completion of all pod updates. Labeled by etcd cluster name.

Reviewer: Isn't it should also have `etcd member name` or `pod-name` also as a label, so that we can determine which member took long time to come up and which member was picked up first. wdyt ?

Author: You're right Ishan but I think those will be considered implementation details, so didn't add too many details here. Just the metric and what it does is mentioned.

Reviewer: >Labeled by etcd cluster name.

I think you have mentioned the labelling, hence I commented.

Author: My bad, I'll remove that. But these 2 metrics are cluster wide hence the label name was cluster name - to determine which member took how much time, I feel we need to introduce a different metric for that altogether, wdyt?

Reviewer: > hence the label name was cluster name 

are you referring to shoot-namespace .. right ? not clusterName

Author: as discussed offline, we'll have both {namespace, name} labels for the metric, but will be omitting this info from the proposal as it falls under implementation details.

> - `etcddruid_ondelete_reconcile_cycles_total`: Number of reconciliation cycles required to complete a full pod update. Labeled by etcd cluster name.

Reviewer 5: I'm curious if it is feasible to calculate this delta for `etcddruid_ondelete_update_duration_seconds` since the controller is stateless and may not have the time of first detection (reconciliations can be separated by restarts of the controller). Unless there is another mechanism to derive the time of first detection. Same applies for the reconciliation cycles metric.

Author: From offline discussion with Rinish: While it's true that we'll lose the in-memory state for these metrics if a druid restart happens in the middle of the update process, but one thing we can do is persist that state in the etcd.status.conditions if we want to continue the counter from what it was previously. This needs further dicussion, will keep it open for now to discuss.

Reviewer 3: Can you please explain how and where will you be using this metric when you have already proposed to capture the total time take to update an etcd cluster?

Author: That stemmed from the observation that today we don't have any such metric to count the no.of reconciliation cycles that happened for some action and we mostly assume that a constant `10s` retry or an exponential retry is good but we didn't actually had the data to back that up and say this is the right thing to do... but if we have such a metric ( at least starting with this ondelete controller ) then we would have a way to quantify many cycles does it actually take and associate it with the time from the above metric and come up with the right time/cycle ratio to not requeue too often or too late. I hope this makes sense.

For a single-node etcd cluster, concerns 1 and 2 do not apply: there is no quorum to preserve and no leader-election to avoid.

### Goals

- Prevent unintended quorum loss during voluntary pod updates by replacing the default StatefulSet rolling order with a druid-controlled, health-aware order.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not claim to prevent all forms of quorum loss. It reduces the likelihood of quorum loss that arises from applying the StatefulSet's default, health-agnostic rolling order to a quorum-sensitive workload.
- This proposal does not cover the PVC resizing or volume replacement flow itself. `OnDelete` is recommended for a safe resize procedure, but the resize flow is covered in a separate proposal (see [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing)).

## Proposal

### Feature Gate

The OnDelete behaviour is opt-in via a new feature gate, `UpdateStrategyOnDelete`, declared alongside the existing gates in `api/config/v1alpha1/features.go`. Operators enable it by setting it in the `featureGates` map of the operator configuration:

```yaml
# OperatorConfiguration
featureGates:

>   UpdateStrategyOnDelete: true

Reviewer 3: Can we give this a more semantically meaningful name like `QuorumAwareUpdates` or something similar? Setting OnDelete as an update strategy is just one of the things that we do. OnDelete controller does candidate selection, pausing when it is not safe to do updates etc. So it is quorum aware.

Similarly the DEP is currently named after STS OnDelete update strategy but that is just one part of the story. So we should perhaps rename the DEP as well.

Author: Makes sense, I went with a middle ground of both `QuorumAwareUpdatesWithOnDelete` to reflect the actual strategy which helps in making that quorum awareness possible, as otherwise it can be unclear how we're achieving that.

```

- **Maturity:** Alpha
- **Default:** `false`
- **Scope:** Operator-wide. The gate applies to every etcd cluster managed by that etcd-druid instance; there is no per-cluster override.

> - **Effect when enabled:** The Etcd reconciler sets `spec.updateStrategy.type = OnDelete` on every managed StatefulSet, and the OnDelete controller (described below) takes over pod updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Effect when enabled:** The Etcd reconciler sets `spec.updateStrategy.type = OnDelete` on every managed StatefulSet, and the OnDelete controller (described below) orchestrates pod updates.
```

Both switches are inherently safe because they touch only the StatefulSet's `spec.updateStrategy.type` field; no pod is deleted as part of the switch itself. A pod whose deletion is in flight when the switch happens completes its lifecycle normally and is replaced; the new strategy applies to subsequent pods.

**Note on version downgrade.** Downgrading to a version of etcd-druid that pre-dates this DEP is functionally identical to disabling the gate (the second switch above), since the older reconciler will set `RollingUpdate` on its next reconciliation. Any OnDelete rollout in progress at the time of the downgrade continues under Kubernetes StatefulSet control afterwards, with no loss of progress.

### VPA Interaction

The Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) in `Recreate` or `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode does not modify the StatefulSet spec directly. VPA operates through two independent mechanisms:

1. **VPA Updater**: Evicts pods that don't match the recommended resource values. This eviction respects the PDB.

> 2. **VPA Admission Controller**: When the StatefulSet controller (or the OnDelete controller) recreates a pod, the admission webhook injects VPA-recommended resource values into the new pod's spec at creation time.

Reviewer 3: >When the StatefulSet controller (or the OnDelete controller) recreates a pod,

`OnDelete` controller does not recreate pods, it only deletes it whereas the STS controller does recreate pods. So what you have mentioned is not accurate.

---
title: StatefulSet OnDelete Update Strategy
dep-number: 07
creation-date: 2024-09-20
status: implementable
authors:
- "@anveshreddy18"
reviewers:
- "etcd-druid-maintainers"
---

# DEP-07: Druid Controlled Pod Updates via StatefulSet OnDelete Strategy

## Summary

> This proposal recommends supporting the `OnDelete` update strategy to be used by etcd-druid to update the StatefulSet pods backing the Etcd cluster members. With `OnDelete`, the Kubernetes StatefulSet controller no longer automatically rollout the pods when the pod template changes. Instead, a new dedicated controller in etcd-druid takes responsibility for deleting and recreating pods in a carefully chosen order that accounts for etcd member health and cluster role. The goal is to prevent unintended quorum loss during spec updates to the Etcd cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, etcd-druid provisions etcd clusters as StatefulSets configured with the RollingUpdate update strategy. On a pod-template change, the StatefulSet controller rolls pods in a fixed highest-to-lowest ordinal order, with no awareness of etcd member health or role. When an existing member is already unhealthy, this ordering can cause an avoidable transient quorum loss during routine spec updates.

This proposal switches etcd-druid to configure the StatefulSet with the `OnDelete` update strategy provided by Kubernetes. Under OnDelete, the StatefulSet controller does not roll pods automatically on pod-template changes; instead, a new dedicated controller in etcd-druid deletes and recreates pods in an order that accounts for member health and cluster role. Voluntary updates — image bumps, configuration changes, resource changes — are then propagated under druid's control, with significantly reduced risk of unintended quorum loss in multi-node clusters.
```

## Terminology

- **OnDelete**: A StatefulSet update strategy where pods are only updated when they are explicitly deleted. The StatefulSet controller does not automatically rollout the pods on template changes.
- **RollingUpdate**: A StatefulSet update strategy where the StatefulSet controller automatically updates pods one by one, from the highest ordinal to the lowest.
- **Quorum**: The minimum number of etcd members that must agree on a value for the cluster to make progress. For a 3-member cluster, quorum is 2.
- **Leader**: The etcd member responsible for handling client write requests and coordinating replication.
- **Follower**: An etcd member that replicates data from the leader and can serve linearizable reads.

> - **Participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is part of the quorum (the member is either a leader or a follower).

Reviewer 3: can also be a learner, right?

Author: I've originally added `learner` in the early versions of the proposal but later removed it in favor of the two terms that we've added, as `learner` falls into the `non-participating pod` category because it's not contributing to the quorum and the proposal doesn't talk about it's state. I hope that's fine?

> - **Participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is part of the quorum (the member is either a leader or a follower).

Reviewer 3: I see that the two terms introduced `Participating pod` and `Non-participating pod` has been debated.

Perhaps a better phrasing is:
**Participating pod:** A pod whose etcd container is currently serving as a leader or follower in the cluster's quorum (i.e., it passes its readiness probe).
**Non-Participating pod:** A pod whose etcd member is not currently contributing to quorum, regardless of cause (process down, member not yet joined, network-partitioned etc.).

Author: yeah, I can improve the phrasing as you suggested, thanks

- **Non-participating pod**: A pod whose etcd container is not part of the quorum (the member may be down, restarting, or not yet joined).

## Motivation

Currently etcd-druid deploys etcd clusters as StatefulSets with `RollingUpdate` strategy. The StatefulSet controller rolls pods from the highest ordinal to the lowest, without considering the health or role of individual etcd members. This creates a risk of unintended quorum loss.

> Consider a 3-member etcd cluster with pods `P-0`, `P-1`, and `P-2`. If `P-0` becomes unhealthy (due to network issues, node failure, or an internal error), the cluster still has quorum with `P-1` and `P-2`. Now, if a StatefulSet template update is triggered (for example, an image version bump), the StatefulSet controller starts rolling from `P-2`. It deletes `P-2` and waits for it to come back. During this window, only `P-1` is healthy and participating, which is below quorum (2 out of 3). The cluster experiences a transient quorum loss that could have been entirely avoided if the update had started with the already-unhealthy `P-0` instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider a 3-member cluster with pods P-0, P-1, and P-2. Suppose P-0 is currently unhealthy — it could be partitioned from the network, on a failing node, or hitting an internal etcd error — while P-1 and P-2 are healthy and form a quorum. An operator now triggers a routine spec update, e.g. an image bump. The StatefulSet controller starts at the highest ordinal, deletes P-2, and waits for it to come back ready before proceeding. During that window only P-1 is participating; with 1 of 3 members up, the cluster has lost quorum and stalls writes until P-2 returns. The same outcome repeats when P-1 is rolled next. The unhealthy P-0 — the pod whose deletion would have been safe, since it wasn't contributing anyway — is rolled last, by which time the avoidable downtime has already been incurred.
```

Reviewer 3: I agree with @CaptainIRS  comment that there are several motivations to introduce `OnDelete` as the chosen strategy to manage StatefulSet pods for an etcd cluster.

* Motivation-1: Reduce the possibility of extended transient quorum loss by intelligently selecting pods to update based on their health.
* Motivation-2: Reduce the number of times the leadership is transferred by selecting the pods based on their current role (follower/learner first and leader last). Of course you cannot handle the situation where the leadership changes mid-update.

Author: Added these two along with the PVC resizing as also a motivation.

The following diagram illustrates how the `RollingUpdate` strategy can lead to quorum loss in this scenario:

<div align="center">
<img src="assets/07-rolling-update-state-diagram.png" alt="RollingUpdate state diagram showing quorum loss when an unhealthy pod exists" width="500">
</div>

The StatefulSet controller starts from Pod N (the highest ordinal), terminates it, and waits for the new pod to become ready. If the terminated pod is not the originally unhealthy one, cluster goes into a transient quorum loss with 2 members down.

For a single-node etcd cluster, both `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` produce the same outcome since there is only one pod to update. The benefit of `OnDelete` is specific to multi-node clusters where update ordering matters.

### Goals

- Prevent unintended quorum loss caused by the StatefulSet controller updating pods in an order that does not consider cluster health.

> - Introduce a spec field on the Etcd custom resource that allows operators to choose between `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` strategies per cluster.

Reviewer 3: Why should this be done?
This exposes internal implementation detail that etcd-druid uses a StatefulSet behind the scene. If tomorrow for some reason we wish to move away from STS then these strategies might no longer make sense. 

Additionally i would like to understand in which situations would you choose to use `RollingUpdate` and which scenarios would you like to use `OnDelete`. Can you please clarify since you have till this point in the concept not mentioned the use cases for each strategy.

Author: Changed as discussed in the call and as mentioned here: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3323729107

> - Ensure that updates triggered by changes to the StatefulSet pod template (image versions, configuration, resource requests) are propagated to pods under druid's control.

Reviewer 3: not sure how is this a goal? StatefulSet is an internal implementation detail. The user only deals with `Etcd` resource. Kindly explain this goal

Author: Done.
For detailed reply, pls check: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3323729107

### Non-Goals

> - This proposal does not claim to prevent all forms of quorum loss. It reduces the likelihood of quorum loss caused by poorly-ordered voluntary pod updates.

Reviewer 3: >caused by poorly-ordered voluntary pod updates.

This is an incorrect reason - it is not `poorly ordered` - these usage of words reflects that StatefulSet controller made a bad judgement call. But this is not true, they have clearly defined the update order as part of StatefulSet behavior semantics w.r.t updates and is being clearly documented. It is the poor judgement on our part to depend upon a defined update strategy which can potentially cause transient quorum loss during updates. For nonHA this is fine but for HA it can violate the SLA for availability during updates.

Author: Changed the wording to reflect that sts controller ordering was not suitable for quorum based workloads like etcd instead of the `poorly ordered` word.

> - This proposal does not cover PVC resizing or volume replacement. The OnDelete strategy makes PVC resizing safer (see [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing)), but the PVC resize flow itself is a separate feature.

Reviewer 5: Nit:
```suggestion
- This proposal does not cover PVC resizing or volume replacement.
```
Just a follow-up from https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3233539561

> - This proposal does not cover PVC resizing or volume replacement. The OnDelete strategy makes PVC resizing safer (see [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing)), but the PVC resize flow itself is a separate feature.

Reviewer 3: Well to do volume resizing, you will have to use `OnDelete` update strategy. So this use case becomes a motivation which you should explicitly mention in the `Motivation` section of this DEP. However detailing on how to achieve volume resizing is out of scope for this DEP and should be covered in a separate DEP.

Reviewer 5: @unmarshall could you please explain why the `OnDelete` strategy would help in PVC resizing?

As mentioned in the proposal,
> The OnDelete controller's own detection of outdated pods is based on the `controller-revision-hash` label, which is computed from the pod template spec only and does not include `volumeClaimTemplates`. A change to `storageCapacity` or `storageClass` alone will therefore not trigger the OnDelete controller; the PVC resize flow will handle pod replacement through its own mechanism.

So, my understanding is that the logic in the `OnDelete` controller would not come into effect if the StatefulSet spec is updated during PVC resizing. So, it would be the responsibility of the PVC resizing flow to perform the individual pod updates while ensuring there is no transient quorum loss.

Author: Thanks for taking time to respond @CaptainIRS, Madhav & Me had a call and we agreed that `OnDelete` is not a requirement but the safest way to go about the PVC resizing...so the original comment is invalid now. I've mentioned in the proposal the same about recommendation vs requirement.

Reviewer 5: Not sure I understand this. Do you mean the `controller-revision-hash` actually changes with modifications to `storageCapacity` or `storageClass`?

Author: No, that doesn't change. What I mean is that setting the updateStrategy to `OnDelete` on the STS is a safer way and can be mentioned as such in the proposal that going with OnDelete will also help ease up the PVC resizing flow, not exactly about the involvement of the `ondelete-controller` which we're introducing in this proposal, setting `OnDelete` on the sts & ondelete controller in etcd-druid are two different things essentially and this proposal does both, but the former is helpful for the PVC resizing. Pls lmk if it's still unclear.

Reviewer 5: My point in general is that the PVC resizing flow is independent of the `updateStrategy` of the StatefulSet. The PVC resizing flow will be deleting pods and the StatefulSet controller will be recreating them as the required pod is missing (not because an update was triggered, as the hash doesn't change), so I don't see how the choice of `updateStrategy` matters in this flow.

Author: > The PVC resizing flow will be deleting pods

This is only possible when the update strategy is set to `OnDelete`, so that way there's a link.

Reviewer 5: I'm a bit confused. From what I understand you can delete pods managed by a StatefulSet irrespective of update strategy and the StatefulSet controller will recreate it to match the desired state. Am I missing something?

Reviewer 5: From the perspective of the StatefulSet controller there is no update going on. So, it would just treat it as the case where a pod had disappeared and has to be recreated.

Author: In general we can always delete the pod and sts will recreate it for us, sure!, but when there's an update and if `RollingUpdate` is set, then we don't have control over the deletion order if we just let STS to do it but if we choose to interfere as well then there's two actors acting on the cluster now ( PVC resizing flow & sts controller), which is also not right imo. So to have a exclusive control over the process to make it safe, `OnDelete` can be a safer way even for PVC resizing.

And no it's not a prerequisite as mentioned in the proposal already. It's just a more controlled way of progressing.

> - Optimizing the update process for clusters with more than 3 replicas (updating multiple pods concurrently while maintaining quorum) is left as future work.

Reviewer 3: I did not understand this point. An update strategy is for an STS of any size >=1. How can this be a non-goal? When you write a DEP specifically for changing the underline update strategy for HA and non-HA clusters then you envision it in its entirety and then you can say that in iteration-1 of the implementation these will be covered and in iteration-2 of the implementation some other things will be covered. But this cannot be a non-goal for a proposal. You need to think through this.

Author: I've now changed it as per the recommendations in the call and as highlighted in this comment https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3323886242. Pls check.

## Proposal

> ### Update Strategy as an Etcd Spec Field

Reviewer 3: As mentioned earlier - please provide reasons to do that.

Author: Done.
For detailed reply pls check https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3323729107

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Etcd
spec:
  updateStrategy: RollingUpdate  # or OnDelete
```

- **Default value**: `RollingUpdate`
- **Valid values**: `OnDelete`, `RollingUpdate`

The default is set to `RollingUpdate` to preserve the existing behaviour for current clusters; `OnDelete` is opt-in initially so it can be exercised on selected clusters. Once `OnDelete` has been validated for few releases, the default will switch to `OnDelete` in a subsequent release. Both strategies remain valid indefinitely.

**API type definition:**

```go
// UpdateStrategyType defines the type of update strategy for the StatefulSet.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=RollingUpdate;OnDelete
type UpdateStrategyType string

const (
    UpdateStrategyTypeRollingUpdate UpdateStrategyType = "RollingUpdate"
    UpdateStrategyTypeOnDelete      UpdateStrategyType = "OnDelete"
)

type EtcdSpec struct {
    // ...existing fields...

    // UpdateStrategy defines the update strategy to be used for the StatefulSet backing the Etcd cluster.
    // +optional
    UpdateStrategy *UpdateStrategyType `json:"updateStrategy,omitempty"`
}
```

> This is a per-cluster choice. Operators can set different strategies for different Etcd clusters. Changing the field on a live cluster is supported and triggers a seamless transition (see [Transitioning Between Strategies](#transitioning-between-strategies)).

Reviewer 3: There is no transition for an end-user. etcd-druid hides the implementation detail and only provides a high level capability to update an etcd-cluster. This means the user changes the spec, expects that an etcd-cluster will be updated, delegates to etcd-druid which chooses behind the scenes a STS to realize and etcd-cluster (implementation detail) and on top of that chooses a strategy for update (another implementation detail).

In the end for the end-user the end-result is that the target etcd-cluster gets updated or it fails to get updated in which case the status of an `Etcd` resource should reflect that clearly.

Author: We've discussed this at length in a call and I agree with all the points related to the presence of API field for choosing between strategies - that for the end users it doesn't matter what implementation path we take in the code and the fact that it's very statefulset specific makes it a breaking change if and when we transition out of STS into something like a quorum based workload resource that we might plan to bring in the future.

I've now removed the API field and we're instead going with the feature gate to transition between the update strategies as we start with an alpha gate and eventually making it run with just `OnDelete` in the future once we are fully confident of it.

Reviewer: > etcd-druid hides the implementation detail and only provides a high level capability to update an etcd-cluster.

why it has to hide this information ? ... I didn't get it, if statefulset is already exposing the `updateStrategy` api and druid is also simply setting up this sts `updateStrategy`, then why not we let the end user of druid to decide which `updateStrategy` they want to use (defaulting to `OnDelete`), just documents the pros and cons of both strategy.

> when we transition out of STS into something like a quorum based workload resource 

that's hypothetical scenario for now, I don't see it coming in this year or next year, and even if it will come. alot of things need to be revisited, hence I don't buy this argument.

Reviewer: I had a offline discussion with @unmarshall , he have answered all of my points
1. To choose the best `updateStrategy` for druid user.
2. If we expose the `updateStrategy` via api and set to `OnDelete` then druid user might think that they have to handle the deletion of etcd member pods, which is wrong.
3. If in futute if upstream statefulset adds one more `updateStrategy` then we will first evaluate it before making it configurable or anything but right now that's not the case.

I'm fine with the answers, so we can go ahead with the `feature-gate`.

> A spec field is preferred over a feature gate for this choice because the decision between `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` is intended to remain a per-cluster, long-lived setting rather than a global, transitional one. A feature gate would graduate and eventually disappear, forcing every cluster onto the new default; a spec field lets each cluster opt in or out by editing the Etcd resource, without an operator restart or coordinated migration.

Reviewer 3: why is a feature gate option relevant for comparison? Not clear.

Author: This is no longer present as we're going with the feature gate mechanism itself.

### The OnDelete Controller

A new controller, separate from the existing Etcd reconciler, is responsible for managing pod updates when the OnDelete strategy is active. This controller watches StatefulSet resources and reconciles whenever the StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision` changes, indicating that a pod template update needs to be propagated to pods.

**Why a separate controller instead of extending the StatefulSet component:**

The StatefulSet component can potentially do the update via the existing Etcd reconciliation loop. We choose a separate controller because:

> - **Pod-by-pod waits do not block the reconciler.** A full update can span many reconciliation cycles, since each pod must come back and rejoin the quorum before the next one is touched. A separate controller progresses asynchronously and does not tie up a reconciler thread per cluster for the duration of an update, which is unnecessary and could lead to scalability issues if many clusters are updating simultaneously.

Reviewer 3: This is not a strong argument. In the etcd reconciler we no longer block, we always requeue. So blocking or tie up of threads is not really a concern. If many clusters are getting updated simultaneously then you will just transfer the same issue to the new reconciler.

Also IMHO having 2 reconcilers which are going to reconcile a single `Etcd` resource is not a k8s recommended way as it can lead to race conditions. You can argue that if the rolling update is in progress for an etcd cluster then the main etcd reconciler (that exists today) will skip reconciliation for that Etcd resource and return early. But i do not really get the benefit here. There is the other reconciler that will have to anyways do that work. It is not only STS there are other components like ConfigMap that might also need changes, would you then duplicate the entire set of components for another reconciler?

W.r.t number of threads/workers - for the net new reconciler you will have to also configure that to a non-zero value. So overall the number of workers will have to increase any which way.

Author: As discussed in the call, I've updated the points. Pls check.

> - **Separation of concerns.** The Etcd reconciler ensures the StatefulSet spec matches the desired state among other things; the OnDelete controller propagates that spec to existing pods in a health-aware order. Keeping these in separate controllers makes each loop simpler to reason about.

Reviewer 3: This is not a strong point. etcd reconciler ensures that the you move towards a desired state. Even today you can have errors when calling `Sync` on all managed components. For these errors we requeue. So where is the difference? Updates are intrinsic part of the same reconciler because it defines a new desired state that you need to reconcile to.

Author: As discussed in the call, I've updated the points. Pls check :)

**Coordination with the Etcd reconciler.**

The Etcd reconciler writes the StatefulSet spec; the OnDelete controller only deletes pods. They don't contend on the same field, so there is no update conflict on the StatefulSet object itself.

The OnDelete controller is stateless: i.e every reconciliation re-reads the current StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision` and the current pod set. If the Etcd reconciler pushes a new pod template while OnDelete is mid-rollout of a prior revision, the next reconciliation observes the new `updateRevision`, treats every pod whose `controller-revision-hash` no longer matches as outdated (including ones already updated against the prior revision), and continues the procedure from there. No explicit handover between controllers is needed.

> The strategy switch itself is coordinated by sequencing: when `spec.updateStrategy` changes on the Etcd CR, the StatefulSet component updates the StatefulSet's `spec.updateStrategy` first, and the OnDelete controller's predicate (`spec.updateStrategy.type == OnDelete`) ensures it engages only when the StatefulSet is in the matching mode. The Kubernetes StatefulSet controller and the OnDelete controller therefore never act on pod updates concurrently.

Reviewer 3: This is completely unnecessary. It stems from the same observation that exposing this field in the API is pointless from my perspective.

Author: I've now removed the API requirement as mentioned in https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/pull/879#discussion_r3323729107

A pod is considered outdated if its `controller-revision-hash` label does not match the StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision`. The `controller-revision-hash` is a Kubernetes-managed label on each pod that reflects the revision of the pod template it was created from.

> **Note:** The OnDelete controller relies on the `controller-revision-hash` label being present on pods and on the StatefulSet's `.status.updateRevision` to signal the target revision. While `appsv1.StatefulSetRevisionLabel` is a public constant and the string comparison logic is safe regardless of how the hash is computed, the contract of how and whether the k8s populates this label on pods is not formally guaranteed. If Kubernetes changes how the StatefulSet controller determines whether pods are up-to-date, the OnDelete controller's outdated-pod detection may need to be revisited.
>
> The `controller-revision-hash` is computed from the pod template spec only. Changes to `volumeClaimTemplates` do not affect this hash. See [Interaction with PVC Resizing](#interaction-with-pvc-resizing).

### Health Assessment

The OnDelete controller needs to understand two things about each pod:

> 1. **Is the pod participating in the etcd quorum?** This is determined by the etcd container's readiness. The readiness probe hits etcd-wrapper's `/readyz` endpoint, which performs an etcd client `Get` call. This is a linearizable (cluster-wide) check: it succeeds only when the etcd member can serve traffic, which requires quorum. When quorum is lost, all pods fail readiness, even those whose local etcd process is running fine.

Reviewer 3: >it succeeds only when the etcd member can serve traffic, which requires quorum

Not clear. It is possible that the etcd-member can serve traffic but there is no quorum, thus negating this argument. Which should perhaps reword it.

Something like:
```
This is determined by the etcd container's readiness probe, which the kubelet evaluates against the pod's IP directly (the probe does not go through any Service). The probe hits etcd-wrapper's /readyz endpoint, which inside the pod issues a linearizable Get against the local etcd process at 127.0.0.1:<client-port>

A successful probe means: this member is up and in contact with a healthy quorum. 
A failing probe means: either this member is down/partitioned, or the cluster as a whole has lost quorum. The probe alone cannot distinguish those cases — when quorum is lost, every pod's probe fails, including pods whose local etcd process is healthy. The local-process liveness signal in (2) is what lets the controller still pick a useful pod to delete first in that situation.
```

Author: > It is possible that the etcd-member can serve traffic but there is no quorum, thus negating this argument
We agreed that's not the case but however I've improved the point to be more detailed as you recommended.

2. **Is the local etcd process alive?** This is a separate question from quorum participation. A pod may fail readiness (because quorum is lost) while its local etcd process is perfectly healthy. Distinguishing between "process is dead" and "process is alive but quorum is lost" allows the controller to make better decisions about which non-participating pod to update first.

   The controller determines local process liveness by inspecting the etcd container's state under `pod.status.containerStatuses[]`. The container's process is considered:

   - **Dead** when `state.Terminated` is set (the container has exited), or `state.Waiting` is set with a failure reason such as `CrashLoopBackOff`, `RunContainerError`, `ImagePullBackOff`, `ErrImagePull`, or `CreateContainerConfigError`.
   - **Alive** when `state.Running` is set, regardless of readiness.

>    - **Transient/starting** when `state.Waiting` is set with `ContainerCreating` or `PodInitializing`. These are not classified as dead and the controller leaves them untouched until they progress to one of the above states.

Reviewer 3: when you say the controller leaves them `untouched` - what does that mean precisely?
Also a container can remain stuck in `ContainerCreating` state right?  Maybe the CSI driver for different reasons fails to attach a PV in which case the container can be stuck in this state till there is manual intervention. But as per your statement (which i might have also misinterpreted) it will leave these pods as `untouched` - this means now the update is stuck as well.

Author: I've now changed the proposal a bit w.r.t to these container statuses, there's a priority order in which we'll delete the non-participating pods based on the container's state prioritising dead -> transient -> alive in that order. Pls check the updated proposal.

>    In the future, adding a liveness probe to the etcd container using etcd's native `/livez` endpoint (available since etcd 3.5.x, performs a serializable/local-only health check) would provide a more reliable signal. This is tracked in [etcd-wrapper#7](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-wrapper/issues/7) and [etcd-druid#280](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/280). The OnDelete controller is designed to work without this probe (using container status as described above) and to benefit from it when available.

Reviewer 3: Above you mentioned:
```
Distinguishing between "process is dead" and "process is alive but quorum is lost" allows the controller to make better decisions about which non-participating pod to update first.
```

But here you say:
```
The OnDelete controller is designed to work without this probe (using container status as described above) and to benefit from it when available.
```

As long as there is a `/livez` endpoint whether you use the one that directly comes from upstream etcd or what is already defined on the container - do you recommend in this DEP to use that or not? A bit unclear.

Author: I've now removed all references to the `/livez` endpoint as we're not introducing the endpoint any time soon due to issues it could surface w.r.t prematurely restarting an etcd container, etc.

So we now only use the container statuses to figure out the information related to it's liveness and not depend on any probe. Updated the proposal to reflect the same.

### Pod Update Procedure

> The controller processes one pod per reconciliation cycle. After updating a pod, it requeues and waits for the pod to come back before proceeding to the next one. This ensures that the cluster is never in a state where more than one pod is being updated at the same time due to the controller's own actions.

Reviewer 3: > The controller processes one pod per reconciliation cycle.

Let us consider a case where the quorum is already lost. Out of 3 nodes 2 are unhealthy. Would it make sense to delete both and recreate both together in one shot instead of doing it one at a time at all times?

Author: I did consider that idea initially but if out of those 2 nodes, if at least one of them was only momentarily down leading to transient quorum loss, there's a chance it could come back and join quorum so we want to be conservative with the update process to not cause any artificial quorum loss from our side. So for now it's fine to go one at a time.

| Second | etcd process is alive (`state.Running`) but readiness fails (quorum loss) | Process is healthy. Restarting the pod gets the new spec without making things worse. |

Delete the selected pod and requeue.

**Step 3: Ensure all updated pods are participating.** Before touching any participating pod, verify that every pod already carrying the latest revision is in a participating state. If any updated pod is still non-participating (for example, a pod deleted in a previous cycle has not yet rejoined the quorum), requeue and wait. This prevents the controller from removing a second participating member while a previously-updated one is still recovering.

**Step 4: Update one participating pod.** At this point, all outdated pods are participating. Select one for deletion using this priority:

| Priority | Role | Rationale |
|----------|------|-----------|
| First | Follower | Deleting a follower does not trigger a leader election. |
| Second | Leader | Deleting the leader may trigger a brief leader election, so it is done last. |

The controller determines member roles by reading the member lease's `holderIdentity` field, which contains the member ID and role.

> > **Note:** When the leader pod is deleted with a normal grace period, the etcd server attempts a graceful [leadership transfer](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/326d5a2e7765d1d918865d2c3897f0a27320db80/server/etcdserver/server.go#L1319-L1331) before shutting down, so in practice the cluster does not observe a full leader-election downtime. An explicit move-leader call from the controller before updating a leader is therefore not needed.

Reviewer 3: While this is true, you must state clearly that transfer of leadership as done from within the etcd code is `best-effort`. It does not wait for the leadership to be transferred successfully. This helps the reviewer understand what is the trade-off.

Author: Done.

Delete the selected pod and requeue.

**Step 5: Repeat** until all pods are up to date.

The following diagram summarizes the OnDelete update procedure:

<div align="center">
<img src="assets/07-OnDelete-StateDiagram.png" alt="OnDelete state diagram showing the simplified pod update procedure" width="700">
</div>

### Pod Deletion Method

> The controller uses direct `Delete` calls for all pod deletions, rather than using the eviction API.

Reviewer 3: you must clarify what `direct Delete` is.

Perhaps you can rephrase it so that there is no room for any doubt/ambiguity/misinterpretation.

```
The controller deletes pods by calling the pod DELETE endpoint (client.Delete), not the `pods/eviction` subresource. The two are distinct API operations: pod DELETE does not consult the `PodDisruptionBudget`, while eviction does. The `OnDelete` controller relies on its own health-aware logic to decide when a delete is safe, so it does not need the PDB's check on top.
```

Author: Done.

**Why Delete instead of Evict:**

Several approaches were evaluated:

1. **Eviction without `unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy`**: The PDB blocks all evictions when any pod is unready (since `minAvailable` drops to the threshold). This deadlocks the controller when a pod is already unhealthy, which is precisely the scenario OnDelete is designed to handle.

2. **Eviction with `unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy: IfHealthyBudget`**: Allows eviction of unhealthy pods when enough healthy pods exist. Handles the common case of one unhealthy pod, but still deadlocks when two or more pods are unhealthy.

3. **Eviction with `unhealthyPodEvictionPolicy: AlwaysAllow`**: Allows eviction of all unhealthy pods regardless of budget. Solves the deadlock but weakens PDB protection against external actors (VPA, node drain, cluster autoscaler) that could concurrently evict unhealthy pods.

4. **Direct Delete**: Simple and does not interact with the PDB at all.

The recommended approach is direct `Delete` for the following reasons:

> - The current `RollingUpdate` strategy already uses `Delete` calls internally. Switching to `OnDelete` with `Delete` calls does not change the deletion mechanism, only the ordering.

Reviewer 3: always provide proof of your claim:

Rephrase:
```
The current RollingUpdate strategy already deletes pods via the pods DELETE endpoint, not the pods/eviction subresource — see
[ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/865560c3d264865c2cf7e86863feb220e7848bba/pkg/controller/statefulset/stateful_pod_control.go#L118-L120)

Author: Done.

To support both pre-fix and post-fix Kubernetes versions, the OnDelete controller computes the equivalent information directly from the pods: it compares each pod's `controller-revision-hash` with the StatefulSet's `updateRevision`. The existing readiness and condition checks will be updated to use this pod-level comparison when the `OnDelete` strategy is active. This pod-level approach is robust across Kubernetes versions, so it remains valid after etcd-druid raises its minimum supported Kubernetes version to one that includes the upstream fix.

### Transitioning Between Strategies

> Transitioning between `RollingUpdate` and `OnDelete` is seamless and requires no manual intervention beyond changing the `spec.updateStrategy` field on the Etcd custom resource.

Reviewer 3: This is not even required. This entire section IMHO is not required.

Author: That section in it's previous form was deemed not required because of the API spec field but we agreed that we should mention clearly about the flow of transitions that happen while switching between update strategies. I've now updated it.

2. **VPA Admission Controller**: When the StatefulSet controller (or the OnDelete controller) recreates a pod, the admission webhook injects VPA-recommended resource values into the new pod's spec at creation time.

Since VPA does not modify the StatefulSet pod template, it does not trigger a new `updateRevision` and the OnDelete controller is not involved in VPA-driven resource updates. VPA continues to operate independently regardless of the update strategy.

### Interaction with PVC Resizing

The PVC resizing story ([etcd-druid#481](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/issues/481)) and the OnDelete controller are independent features. The OnDelete controller detects outdated pods by comparing `controller-revision-hash` labels, which are computed from the pod template spec only and do not include `volumeClaimTemplates`. A change to `storageCapacity` or `storageClass` alone will not trigger the OnDelete controller. The PVC resize flow will be covered in a separate proposal and will handle pod deletion through its own mechanism.

### Metrics

The OnDelete controller exposes the following metrics:

> - `etcddruid_ondelete_update_duration_seconds`: Time from the first detection of an `updateRevision` change to the completion of all pod updates. Labeled by etcd cluster name.

Reviewer 3: why should this be specific to ondelete?
There needs to be a single metric to compute the total time it takes to update an etcd cluster. If you really want additional information w.r.t what update strategy was used then have it as a label/tag

Author: I thought about it and have removed the metrics section entirely for now as I want to introduce them later in a separate issue/PR and to not unnecessarily complicate this DEP. So we can revisit this then. Thanks.

- `etcddruid_ondelete_reconcile_cycles_total`: Number of reconciliation cycles required to complete a full pod update. Labeled by etcd cluster name.

### Future Scope

- **Backup-restore container health in update ordering**: The current design does not consider the health of the backup-restore sidecar container when deciding which pod to update next. The rationale is that backup-restore health does not affect quorum, and prioritizing it could lead to unnecessary leader elections (for example, if a pod with an unhealthy backup-restore happens to be the leader). If future operational experience shows value in considering backup-restore health as a secondary sorting criterion, the priority order can be extended.

> - **Concurrent pod updates for larger clusters**: For clusters with more than 3 replicas, it is possible to update multiple pods concurrently while maintaining quorum. For example, in a 5-member cluster, 2 pods can be updated simultaneously. This optimization is left for a future iteration.

Reviewer 3: why is this a future scope and why do we assume that the cluster size is always 3 for a HA etcd cluster?

Author: I've now updated it to mean that while we support clusters of all sizes, there's a headroom of updating multiple pods at the same time when the cluster size >3, but that introduces it's own challenges. For the initial iteration, we want to be conservative and go with one at a time for clusters of any size and this can be improved in a later iteration if we see the need for that.
